# Spatial Search

The spatial extension allows to index datasets with spatial information
so they can be filtered via a spatial search query. This includes both
via the web interface (see the [Spatial Search
Widget](#spatial-search-widget)) or via the [action
API](https://docs.ckan.org/en/latest/api/), e.g.:

    http://localhost:5000/api/3/action/package_search?q=Pollution&ext_bbox=-7.535093,49.208494,3.890688,57.372349

The `ext_bbox` parameter must be provided in the form
`ext_bbox={minx},{miny},{maxx},{maxy}`

## Setup

To enable the spatial search you need to add the `spatial_query` plugin
to your ini file. This plugin in turn requires the `spatial_metadata`
plugin, eg:

    ckan.plugins = ... spatial_metadata spatial_query

To define which backend to use for the spatial search use the following
configuration option (see [Choosing a backend for the spatial
search](#choosing-a-backend-for-the-spatial-search)):

    ckanext.spatial.search_backend = solr-bbox

## Geo-Indexing your datasets

Regardless of the backend that you are using, in order to make a dataset
searchable by location, it must have a the location information (a
geometry), indexed in Solr. You can provide this information in two
ways.

### The `spatial` extra field

The easiest way to get your geometries indexed is to use an extra field
named `spatial`. The value of this extra should be a valid
[GeoJSON](http://geojson.org) geometry, for example:

    {
      "type":"Polygon",
      "coordinates":[[[2.05827, 49.8625],[2.05827, 55.7447], [-6.41736, 55.7447], [-6.41736, 49.8625], [2.05827, 49.8625]]]
    }

or:

    {
      "type": "Point",
      "coordinates": [-3.145,53.078]
    }

Every time a dataset is created, updated or deleted, the extension will
index the information stored in the `spatial` in Solr, so it can be
reflected on spatial searches.

If you already have datasets when you enable Spatial Search then you'll
need to [rebuild the search
index](https://docs.ckan.org/en/latest/maintaining/cli.html?#search-index-rebuild-search-index).

### Custom indexing logic

You might not want to use the `spatial` extra field. Perhaps you don't
want to store the geometries in the dataset metadata but prefer to do so
in a separate table, or you simply want to perform a different
processing on the geometries before indexing.

In this case you need to implement the `before_dataset_index()` method
of the
[IPackageController](https://docs.ckan.org/en/latest/extensions/plugin-interfaces.html#ckan.plugins.interfaces.IPackageController.before_dataset_index)
interface:

```python
def before_dataset_index(self, dataset_dict):

    # When using the default `solr-bbox` backend (based on bounding boxes), you need to
    # include the following fields in the returned dataset_dict:

    dataset_dict["minx"] = minx
    dataset_dict["maxx"] = maxx
    dataset_dict["miny"] = miny
    dataset_dict["maxy"] = maxy

    # When using the `solr-spatial-field` backend, you need to include the `spatial_geom`
    # field in the returned dataset_dict. This should be a valid geometry in WKT format.
    # Shapely can help you get the WKT representation of your gemetry if you have it in GeoJSON:

    shape = shapely.geometry.shape(geometry)
    wkt = shape.wkt

    dataset_dict["spatial_geom"] = wkt

    # Don't forget to actually return the dict!

    return dataset_dict
```

Some things to keep in mind:

-   Remember, you only need to provide one field, either `spatial_bbox`
    or `spatial_geom`, depending on the backend chosen.

-   All indexed geometries should fall within the -180, -90, 180, 90
    bounds. If you have polygons crossing the antimeridian (i.e. with
    longituded lower than -180 or bigger than 180) you'll have to split
    them across the antimeridian.

-   Check the default implementation of `before_dataset_index()` in
    [ckanext/spatial/plugins/\_\_init\_\_.py](https://github.com/ckan/ckanext-spatial/blob/master/ckanext/spatial/plugin/__init__.py)
    for extra useful checks and validations.

-   If you want to store the geometry in the `spatial` field but don't
    want to apply the default automatic indexing logic applied by
    ckanext-spatial just remove the field from the dict (this won't
    remove it from the dataset metadata, just from the indexed data):

    ```python
    def before_dataset_search(self, dataset_dict):

        dataset_dict.pop("spatial", None)

        return dataset_dict
    ```

### Choosing a backend for the spatial search

Ckanext-spatial uses Solr to power the spatial search. The current
implementation is tested on Solr 9, which is the supported version,
although it might work on previous Solr versions.

!!! Note
    The are official [Docker images for
    Solr](https://github.com/ckan/ckan-solr) that have all the configuration
    needed to perform spatial searches (look for the ones with a `-spatial`
    suffix). This is the easiest way to get started but if you need to
    customize Solr yourself see below for the modifications needed.

There are different backends supported for the spatial search, it is
important to understand their differences and the necessary setup
required when choosing which one to use. To configure the search backend
use the following configuration option:

    ckanext.spatial.search_backend = solr-bbox | solr-spatial-field

The following table summarizes the different spatial search backends:

  | Backend               | Supported geometries indexed in Solr | Solr setup needed   |
  |-----------------------|- ------------------------------- ----|---------------------|
  | `solr-bbox` (default) | Bounding Box, Polygon (extents only) | Custom fields       |
  |  `solr-spatial-field` | Bounding Box, Point and Polygon      | Custom field +  JTS |

!!! Note
    The default `solr-bbox` search backend was previously known as `solr`.
    Please update your configuration if using this version as it will be
    removed in the future.

The `solr-bbox` backend is probably a good starting point. Here are more
details about the available options (again, you don't need to modify
Solr if you are using one of the spatially enabled official Docker
images):

- `solr-bbox`:
    This option always indexes just the extent of the provided
    geometries, whether if it's an actual bounding box or not. It
    supports spatial sorting of the returned results (based on the
    closeness of their bounding box to the query bounding box). It
    uses standard Solr float fields so you just need to add the
    following to your Solr schema:
    ```xml
        <fields>
            <!-- ... -->
            <field name="minx" type="float" indexed="true" stored="true" />
            <field name="maxx" type="float" indexed="true" stored="true" />
            <field name="miny" type="float" indexed="true" stored="true" />
            <field name="maxy" type="float" indexed="true" stored="true" />
        </fields>
    ```
- `solr-spatial-field`:
    This option uses the [RPT](https://solr.apache.org/guide/8_11/spatial-search.html#rpt)
    Solr field, which allows to index points, rectangles and more
    complex geometries like polygons. This requires the install of
    the [JTS](https://github.com/locationtech/jts) library. See the
    linked Solr documentation for details on this. Note that it does
    not support spatial sorting of the returned results. You will
    need to add the following field type and field to your Solr
    schema file to enable it :
    ```xml
        <types>
            <!-- ... -->
            <fieldType name="location_rpt"   class="solr.SpatialRecursivePrefixTreeFieldType"
                spatialContextFactory="JTS"
                autoIndex="true"
                validationRule="repairBuffer0"
                distErrPct="0.025"
                maxDistErr="0.001"
                distanceUnits="kilometers" />
        </types>

        <fields>
            <!-- ... -->
            <field name="spatial_geom" type="location_rpt" indexed="true" multiValued="true" />
        </fields>
    ```
    By default, the `solr-sptatial-field` backend uses the following
    query. This can be customized by setting the
    `ckanext.spatial.solr_query` configuration option, but note that
    all placeholders must be included:
    ```
       {{!field f=spatial_geom}}Intersects(ENVELOPE({minx}, {maxx}, {maxy}, {miny}))
    ```

!!! Note
    The old `postgis` search backend is no longer supported. You should
    migrate to one of the other backends instead.

## Spatial Search Widget

![image](_static/spatial-search-widget.png)

The extension provides a snippet to add a map widget to the search form,
which allows filtering results by an area of interest.

To add the map widget to the sidebar of the search page, add the
following block to the dataset search page template
(`myproj/ckanext/myproj/templates/package/search.html`). If your custom
theme is simply extending the CKAN default theme, you will need to add
`{% ckan_extends %}` to the start of your custom search.html, then
continue with this:

    {% block secondary_content %}

      {% snippet "spatial/snippets/spatial_query.html" %}

    {% endblock %}

By default the map widget will show the whole world. If you want to set
up a different default extent, you can pass an extra `default_extent` to
the snippet, either with a pair of coordinates like this:

    {% snippet "spatial/snippets/spatial_query.html", default_extent="[[15.62,
        -139.21], [64.92, -61.87]]" %}

or with a GeoJSON object describing a bounding box (note the escaped
quotes):

    {% snippet "spatial/snippets/spatial_query.html", default_extent="{ \"type\":
        \"Polygon\", \"coordinates\": [[[74.89, 29.39],[74.89, 38.45], [60.50,
        38.45], [60.50, 29.39], [74.89, 29.39]]]}" %}

You need to load the `spatial_metadata` and `spatial_query` plugins to
use this snippet.

## Dataset Extent Map

![image](_static/dataset-extent-map.png)

Using the snippets provided, if datasets contain a `spatial` extra like
the one described in the previous section, a map will be shown on the
dataset details page.

There are snippets already created to load the map on the left sidebar
or in the main body of the dataset details page, but these can be easily
modified to suit your project needs

To add a map to the sidebar, add the following block to the dataset page
template (eg
`ckanext-myproj/ckanext/myproj/templates/package/read_base.html`). If
your custom theme is simply extending the CKAN default theme, you will
need to add `{% ckan_extends %}` to the start of your custom read.html,
then continue with this:

    {% block secondary_content %}
      {{ super() }}

      {% set dataset_extent = h.get_pkg_dict_extra(c.pkg_dict, 'spatial', '') %}
      {% if dataset_extent %}
        {% snippet "spatial/snippets/dataset_map_sidebar.html", extent=dataset_extent %}
      {% endif %}

    {% endblock %}

For adding the map to the main body, add this to the main dataset page
template (eg
`ckanext-myproj/ckanext/myproj/templates/package/read.html`):

    {% block primary_content_inner %}

      {{ super() }}

      {% set dataset_extent = h.get_pkg_dict_extra(c.pkg_dict, 'spatial', '') %}
      {% if dataset_extent %}
        {% snippet "spatial/snippets/dataset_map.html", extent=dataset_extent %}
      {% endif %}

    {% endblock %}

You need to load the `spatial_metadata` plugin to use these snippets.
